Hello and welcome back to the course on statistics.
Today we talk about standard deviation.
Very interesting topic ahead.
So let's clarify what standard deviation is once and for all so that we never ever have to worry about
this again.
All right.
So we stopped over here when we talked about continuous and discrete or discrete and continuous variables
and then we talk about discrete and continuous distributions and we established which is very important
that distributions are actually functions attached to.
In our case the columns are the variables and so they're a descriptor of our data rather than some sort
of graph or graph.
In this case a discrete chart or a continuous or the probability density function here.
There are just auxilary elements they assist our understanding and distribution and visualizing them.
But and in essence you don't need a graph for the distribution to to exist.
Distribution exists independent of the graph.
So with that in mind let's move on.
There's this clear the chart that clearly area here and we're going to talk about height just for nomos
to mix it up and just to make it a like for illustrative purposes going to be a convenient variable
for us to work with.
So here we've got five variables five values in this day and fiberglas as we saw Briest it's actually
a greater or larger data set.
We just trimmed down.
But for the purposes of today's tutorial let's imagine that that is all we have that we only have five
rows in this dataset and that's it.
That's a whole dataset.
In that case let's write out our five rows over here or five values of height.
So we have five people.
It's a very small bank.
There's only five people who are customers of his bank.
You can all you can count them on one hand and that that's how tall they are in inches sixty one point
two inches 62 inches sixty five inches seventy point four inches.
Twenty point nine inches.
So we want to find some parameters about our population this is our this is a population because we
only have five people on a sample and we'll talk about the sample populations further down in the course.
But this is not a sample of the population because that's all the people we have in the back.
So we want to find out some parameters about the circulation.
For example what is the meaning of their height.
What does the average of their height while the mean of their height is calculated as you add all their
heights up.
And they divide by 5 and that gives you sixty five point ninety two that's going to be the mean or that
is the mean of the height of all of the customers of this bank.
Now let's talk about the variance.
So variance what is the variance variance is a measure of the spread of your data.
So you know what the mean.
So we know the meannesses five point ninety two which is somewhere in the middle.
So they can see six 5.1 sousaphone 292 somewhere in here.
And the question is how spread out is your data because it could be very close we could get 65 or 9:2
if we had all of them here like sixty five point sixty five point two sixty five point three.
And two of them here like seventy seven point four and so if or something like that or seventy point
three seventy point to something I got we would get when I do or in this case are a bit more spread
out all the way to 12:54 to sone point.
Or they could be even more spread out because could get the same mean sitting over here but they could
be all the way to 40 inches and all the way to what is two meters six six foot something and not that
good a chance of converting is well let's say up to 80 inches.
So between You'd have you could have the same mean but your data could be spread out way further it
could be only from 40 to 80 inches or or more or less so this in its own on its own doesn't tell us
everything it touches a bit but it doesn't tell us a lot that much about the dead it just tells us one
thing tells the.
But we don't know the spread.
For example we don't know the spread about this and so that's why we introduce a new metric which will
help us understand.
OK so we know the I mean how are our observations spread out around this.
I mean on a very close together or are they quite sparse.
Are they quite far apart from this.
I mean and that's why we need a measure of spread.
A very simple trivial very trivial measure of spread that we could introduce is the range.
We could just say OK what's the seventy point nine maximum minus 60 will point to one point to maximize
its minimum.
And that would give us the range that it would be a really good measure of or a starting measure of
spread because of rate of spread.
Because if if or if all the values are very close to sixty five point nine point ninety two.
Then the spread will be then the range will be low.
If the values are spread out far away then the range will be high but that only talks about the maximum
of the minimum.
That's what if we have an outlier we it doesn't tell us anything about the ones in between.
So we'll know or we'll know the mean which.
So here are the minimum the maximum like some barometer about the minimum next month.
But we won't know what's going on in between why we want to do something more robust and that's why
we're introducing variants so variants is introduced as again in an average but an average of what.
Well let's start by experimenting.
Let's see what we can come up for together.
Let's say we take so where you have the mean.
So let's say and we know it's sitting somewhere over there.
Let's take this value the starting first value and we calculate the distance between this value and
the mean and we calculate as on point to my sixty five point ninety two.
That's basically a different system assigned differences are going to be negative here.
But let's just keep this calculation consistent for everybody we're going to take this minus this.
OK.
So that's pretty cool.
So you are asking how far away is this value from the mean which is sitting over here.
Next one let's add 62 minus sixty five point nine.
So again we're asking OK this is the man here sitting somewhere here in between these two.
How far away is this value from the mean.
OK.
That's how far away we are at this one.
How far away that's how far this one how far away.
And at this point how far away.
OK that's really cool.
But if we add them up the problem is it will always add to 0 1.
You can check that for yourself is just the way that means calculate calculated because of the way the
mean is calculated if you plug in the formula here.
Or if you just plug if you're just calling from calculation and this version of variance it would always
add up to zero because these are negative here.
These are positive and the sum is.
And they balance each other out.
So what can we do to this equation to make it better.
Well we could just simply take the absolute values instead of taking the negative here.
Just take the absolute So module Munjal this module this module all of them and then they're positive
or zero positive all of them and that means they'll definitely not add up to 0 unless they're all the
same.
That's not what what happens in this takes in statistics.
We don't take the module.
There is a metric where you use the module which just is not commonly used.
The problem with that is just the graph of the module has a kink in it.
And that means things like differentiation or integration.
They are going to be problems that.
More like more advanced mathematics and calculus are going to be problems.
And it's not just it's not smooth enough.
Probably something not the right word.
It's just not the best approach in the long run.
It might work for us here but in all the other applications of variants that exist in all these cross
across disciplines both Physics Mathematics up to biology chemistry pretty much anywhere.
The modules are going to be the best choice.
So that's why that's probably the main reason why what we go with is squared.
So if we square them we still get the benefit that they are all positive and at the same time we don't
have those same problems as modules.
So there we go.
That's that's what variance is.
So you basically calculate the distance the mean from every single one of these you square it.
You take the average and in mathematics if we put this in an equation then it looks like this so variance
equals the sum of x minus X minus mew mew is our mean we're square.
Divided by hand as we discussed this is a measure of spread of our data and it's fair to say that because
now we're calculating how far in this calculation each variable is controlling the distance from the
mean for each Marable's construe contributing.
So if the data is spread around your mean very tightly packed Orangemen then this will be low.
The variance will be low.
If your data is spread out far away from me mean then this will be high will higher have a high variance
meaning it'll have a high.
The spread of your data is high.
So in our case if you calculate it sixteen point sixty four and now we're going to choose a new concept
standard deviation which you've definitely heard about before.
Standard deviation is basically the square root of your variance.
And in our case it's equal to four point 0 8.
Senator tuition's What are you going to be working with mostly when talking about distributions and
statistics for data.
But sometimes you will you will still hear about variance.
Some tools use variants some methods use variants some equations are only valid for variants and so
on.
So it's good to remember about both of them but also standard deviation is also good to know that.
Let's say if this is height in inches then you mean is in inches.
But if youre here you can see your square.
So your variances in square inches which is not that useful in terms of a measure of spread.
Thats why standard deviation is better because it will be youve got inches squared here and then youve
got to square roots.
These are inches again so you can actually add the standard deviation to your mean you can say OK so
what was the mean plus 1 standard deviation.
OK so in this case mean plus one standard deviation equals 70 right.
Nine laws Yeah.
So equal 70 or mean minus 1 standard deviation equals sixty one point eighty eighty four.
So you can actually work with these operate with them because they're in the same units.
In our case interest you can do the same variance because that square inches.
And that's why variance is used for other things.
All right and now let's change the words to their correct Greek letters.
So there we go that's new which is the mean that's Sigma squared which is your variance and that's Sigma
which is your standard deviation.
Well hopefully all of that makes sense and hopefully that's pretty straightforward what the standard
is what the mean is and what the standard deviation is the variances and standard deviation.
So I mean as you know what is your data centered around and your variance or send division is how spread
out about how spread out is your data around that when it wallet's centered or even though it's centered
around this value hospitalities.
And but the probably the most important question I guess is how do you remember the difference between
the two.
How do you remember that Sigma squared has variance and Sigma and deviation because I used to have this
problem where I would look at something like Ok Sigma squared variance the standard deviation I'll have
to think about it.
I could even get wrong.
So how do you remember which is which because these are obviously if this is your first time dealing
with this is a new term.
The way I remember it now is Siegman squared.
So this is going to give you a visual anchor.
I'm going to give you a visual anchor and for further arrests of your life you're going to remember
what this actually hard to remember this.
OK ready.
All right.
Let's look at this.
Sigma is one.
And the Wii has one part and sigma two as two.
So the first letter here has two parts to it has that line and that line and that and this symbol has
two parts.
So that's how you can always remember so the has two sigma squared.
So a single square has variance.
It's just a quick tip.
So that's you are always on your feet when you're talking about variance and standard deviation.
OK.
So that was standard deviation and variance and mean.
And I hope you do this material and I'll see you next time.
Until then happy analyzing.